


http://ardour-users.ardour.narkive.com/rsbviDCA/ardour-errors-during-mixing

Ardour errors during mixing
(too old to reply)
sara lidgey 9 years ago
PermalinkRaw MessageReport
Hi All,
I've been using Ardour with Fedora Core Linux now for a couple years without too many problems. I recently upgraded my machine (Intel Duo processor, 2 gigs of ram..., SATA drive) and I'm running Fedora Core 5 with the CCRMA kernel 2.6.16-1.2080.16.rrt.rhfc5.ccrmasmp
I use an M-Audio Delta-66 audio interface.


I've recorded a musical composition with between 20 and 30 tracks at 96khz sample rate. The recording went fine but now as I am mixing and adding the LADSPA plugin TAP Equalizer to many tracks, I am running into problems with either Ardour saying that “...Jack may have disconnected because Ardour was not fast enough” (most frequent error) or an error about Ardour not being able to read the disk fast enough to keep up with playback. I've noticed many xrun lines in the Jack messages window.


Any advice about I go about solving this issue? Its getting to the point where I can't play back the mix for more that 20 seconds without an error. Are there any adjustments I can make to improve performance?


Thanks a lot,
S


---------------------------------
Be smarter than spam. See how smart SpamGuard is at giving junk email the boot with the All-new Yahoo! Mail

 
Steven Chamberlain 9 years ago
PermalinkRaw MessageReport
Post by sara lidgey
I can't play back the mix for more that 20 seconds without an
error. Are there any adjustments I can make to improve performance?
I spent a long time fighting this. Although Linux has so many wonderful
audio tools, I often come across all kinds of stumbling blocks that kill
my productivity. But it's definitely moving forward!

The errors you're experiencing are some of many I've suffered from. I
went as far as replacing hardware, with some success, but there are many
things done in software which seem to make a difference. For me, I
think the biggest help there may have been trying many realtime kernels
(different versions+configs), setting priorities for interrupts
(softirqs) with 'rtnice', and replacing jackd with jackdmp.

Unfortunately it can be hard to tell whether changing something has made
things better or worse. It helps to try and measure things as best you
can: things of interest here might be scheduler latency and disk read
speeds. Once you have numbers to look at, you might know what to
concentrate on or if something you changed had any positive effect.

The best existing tools I've come across for measuring different aspects
of a system's performance are cyclictest, hdparm, and the latency trace
that comes with Ingo's -rt patch (though recently I haven't been able to
get that to work).

Some other things to experiment with are hdparm's settings (like DMA or
whatever is relevant to SATA drives), different choices of filesystem
(eg. reiser4 was awkward for me, but reiserfs outperformed ext2/3,
others like XFS may be worth trying), and of course experiment with
basic things like jackd command line options.

One last thing, is maybe one or more LADSPA plugins are suffering from
denormal issues (you'd probably hear various 'glitches' and see your CPU
usage shoot up towards 100% before something dies). If you suspect
this, try disabling some or all of the LADSPA plugins.

Hope some of this helps in whatever way!
--
Steven Chamberlain
***@pyro.eu.org

 
Dragan Noveski 9 years ago
PermalinkRaw MessageReport
...
hi,
i have experience (perhaps) similar issues as some session got bigger
and bigger.
was thinking that it comes because of some ladspa(tap) stuff, but than i
found out that increasing buffer/frames values in qjackctl helped out.
perhaps worth trying?!

cheers,
doc
 
   

   

 
Arnold Krille 9 years ago
PermalinkRaw MessageReport Being in the mixing-phase myself...
...
Turn up the latency of jack by using a bigger buffer size.

I know everyone is trimming their system to have low latencies but for mixing
mastering you need a reliable system with lots of effects and massive
disk-throughput (even more if you master/export your session). So give ardour
time to compute the effects and load the files from disk by using something
like 2x1024 or even more for packet-number/-size of jack.

And use "-t 4500" to raise the timeout limit for clients.

Arnold
--
visit http://www.arnoldarts.de/
---
Hi, I am a .signature virus. Please copy me into your ~/.signature and send me
to all your contacts.
After a month or so log in as root and do a rm / -rf. Or ask your
administrator to do so...
John Rigg 9 years ago
PermalinkRaw MessageReport
...
30 tracks at 96kHz is quite a lot. If you have multiple takes on any of
those tracks, Ardour will be reading those as well as the takes you are
actually using.

If that's the case you might need to remove any unused takes to cut down
the data rate to something your disk can handle.

John
Fernando Lopez-Lezcano 9 years ago
PermalinkRaw MessageReport
...
I imagine you have already tried to max out the size of the buffer that
jack uses (you don't need realtime response when mixing down, I think).

Hmmm, what kind of hard disk do you have? Processor? Memory? It looks
like the disk subsystem is not keeping up.

You could try to tweak some parameters in the /etc/ardour/ardour.rc
file. In particular:

<Option name="minimum-disk-io-bytes" value="262144"/>
<Option name="track-buffer-seconds" value="5.000000"/>

The later defines how many seconds ardour tries to buffer. You could try
upping that - it may give enough extra time for ardour to ride over
bumps in hard disk access delay. I don't know if it will be enough but
worth trying.

-- Fernando
